# Has the Indian consumption of nuts and dry-fruits grown as much as the West, and is there space for growth from that perspective?

With rising health consciousness, purchasing power, and wellness trends amongst people, more so after the pandemic, the demand for nuts and dry fruits has increased in India and abroad. The country is well-placed, though its market is small compared to the West. According to the industry leaders, some of the significant gains are likely to be realised in the industry from economic development, demographics, and dietary change. They are exporting to countries where global demand soars and, surfing on trends like veganism and e-commerce may unlock quite some potential. With rising consumption, the industry appears poised for expansion, promising lucrative opportunities for stakeholders.

Traditionally, nuts and dry fruits have always been popular in India. Be it in the gift hampers we exchange during festivals, or in the different cuisines around the country, nuts and dry fruits are a very integral part of our culture. However, the consumption of nuts and dry fruits in India, although robust, lags behind that of the West for the following reasons.

Firstly, while nuts and dry fruits have always held a cultural significance in India, they have primarily been perceived as luxury items rather than daily staples. On the other hand, in countries like the USA and Europe, nuts and dry fruits are a part of the daily life of the people there and are integrated into their everyday diets in their efforts to lead a health-conscious lifestyle. Secondly, economic patterns play a crucial role in shaping consumer matters in India. To that effect, there is a significant portion of the Indian population for whom nuts and dry fruits remain relatively expensive indulgences. On the contrary, the people in the Western world – where the incomes are higher and the purchasing powers are greater – can afford to have these nuts and dry fruits regularly with ease.

Lastly, India’s expansive geographical landscape presents infrastructure and distribution challenges – something the West does not face. While urban centres in India have easy access to a wide variety of nuts and dry fruits in the form of supermarkets and novelty stores, rural areas often face limited options and higher prices due to logistical constraints. In comparison, Western countries possess well-established supply and distribution networks, ensuring consistent affordability and availability of these commodities across various regions.

Even though India is lagging behind the West in terms of dry fruits consumption, the demand for the same has shot up in recent years, as people have become increasingly conscious of their health, especially since the pandemic. Besides this, an increase in purchasing power, and growing awareness of plant-based diets, among others have also driven demand for nuts and dry fruits in recent years.

In fact, India’s dry fruit market has been experiencing impressive growth, with a steady 10-12 percent compounded annual growth rate (CAGR) even before the pandemic. However, the post-pandemic period has witnessed a surge in demand for healthy snacking options, leading to increased interest in the market. Consumption of dry fruits increased by 25% in 2023, the most in five years, as more and more people turned to these rich sources of minerals and vitamins, known to improve immunity. Of all the dry fruits, Almond consumption has grown with more Indians identifying eating the nutrient-rich crunchy nut packed with protein, fibre, Vitamin E and antioxidants with a healthy lifestyle. According to figures from the Ministry of commerce and Industry, almond imports totalled $531.06 million during the April-October period, or the first seven months of this fiscal year. Traders predict imports in fiscal 2024 to significantly surpass the FY23 figure of $1.01 billion. Before the pandemic, in FY20, almond imports had totalled $874.67 million.

India ranks second in terms of consumption for popular dry fruits like peanuts, almonds, and cashews. The country holds the third position for raisins, fourth for dried figs, sixth for walnuts, and seventh for dates. These statistics demonstrate the significant appetite for dry fruits among Indian consumers, opening up avenues for innovation and market expansion. However, it has yet to catch up to western markets, with the American industry alone being valued at USD 18.13 billion, and is projected to grow with a CAGR of 3.74% from 2024-2030.

The dry fruits and nuts industry in India has immense untapped potential to grow. We have the capacity to significantly increase our exports of domestically produced nuts and dry fruits to international markets, allowing us to capitalise on growing demands and trends. Promotion campaigns and quality certifications would enable us to increase our global footprint, and help us be competitive in foreign markets. The rise of plant-based diets and veganism, driven by environmental and health concerns, is another huge opportunity for the industry to take advantage of. As more people look for alternatives to animal-based products, they will naturally turn to nuts and dry fruits as healthy snacking options, nutrient-dense foods, and alternatives to dairy products. Lastly, the e-commerce boom has presented us with the ability to reach consumers on an unprecedented scale, throughout both urban and rural settings. Customers can now browse through, and purchase products from the convenience of their own homes, eliminating distribution costs and expanding market reach.

Possessing a strong foundation, and coupled with ever-increasing prospects, the future of the Indian dry fruits and nuts industry shines brilliantly.